feTS - Enhancing Type Safety in REST API (#1297)
the-guild-org/website: website/pages/blog/type-safe-your-api.mdx

---
title: feTS - Enhancing Type Safety in REST API Development
authors: tuvalSimha
date: 2023-06-25
tags: [typescript, openapi, rest, api, fets]
description: Discover feTS - Empower your REST API development with type safety, efficiency, and seamless integration using TypeScript and OpenAPI. With Spotify API example.
thumbnail: /blog-assets/type-safe-your-api/endpoint.png
image: /blog-assets/type-safe-your-api/endpoint.png
---

## Introduction

Developers who have experience working with REST API often encounter challenges such as lack of type safety, manual response parsing, and the absence of a unified interface for endpoints. These issues can hinder the efficiency and reliability of REST API development.

> In this blog post, we will explore a powerful tool called feTS that addresses these problems and provides solutions for more effective REST API development.

Reviewer: consider adding a link to `feTS`

## What Is feTS?

> feTS, which stands for "Fetch" + "TypeScript" is a robust tool designed specifically for TypeScript projects. It simplifies the development and consumption of REST API while ensuring type safety. By leveraging OpenAPI specifications and TypeScript decorators, feTS allows developers to build and interact with REST API more efficiently, reducing the likelihood of runtime errors and improving code quality. Importantly, feTS is fully compatible with any existing REST API.

Reviewer: I'm not sure about the `specifically for TypeScript projects` — you can use the client with a REST API written in any language. Maybe you can mention that feTS **Client** is designed for TypeScript projects?

> feTS, which stands for "Framework-Embedded TypeScript," is a robust tool designed specifically for TypeScript projects. It simplifies the development and consumption of REST API while ensuring type safety. By leveraging OpenAPI specifications and TypeScript decorators, feTS allows developers to build and interact with REST API more efficiently, reducing the likelihood of runtime errors and improving code quality. Importantly, feTS is fully compatible with any existing REST API.

Reviewer: isn’t feTS fetch + TypeScript?

> TypeScript decorators

it doesn't use decorators from what I know

You can also add that it's fully compatible as long as there's an OpenAPI spec

## How I Used Web API before feTS?

In this blog post, we will use the Spotify API as an example, but you can apply these principles to any REST API of your choice. You can find the complete code example [here](https://github.com/TuvalSimha/feTS-example).

Spotify provides a developer-friendly API that is easy to use. Here's a example of how to retrieve your top 5 tracks from the last 30 days using the Spotify API:

> 1. Create a Spotify account and retrieve your access token from [here](https://developer.spotify.com/documentation/web-api/reference/get-users-top-artists-and-tracks?type=artists&time_range=short_term&limit=5&offset=0).

Reviewer: The link points to the `get-users-top-artists-and-tracks`.

2. Create a fetchWebApi function that fetches data from the API and returns it as JSON:
    
```typescript
const token = 'YOUR_TOKEN_HERE';

> async function fetchWebApi(endpoint: string, method: string, body: undefined) {

Reviewer 2: Found a better type for the `body`, `undefined` says nothing

  const res = await fetch(`https://api.spotify.com/${endpoint}`, {
    headers: {
      Authorization: `Bearer ${token}`,
    },
    method,
    body: JSON.stringify(body),
  });
  
  return await res.json();
}    
```

3. Call the fetchWebApi function with the desired endpoint:
```typescript
async function getTopTracks() {
  // Endpoint reference: https://developer.spotify.com/documentation/web-api/reference/get-users-top-artists-and-tracks
  return (await fetchWebApi(
    'v1/me/top/tracks?time_range=short_term&limit=5',
    'GET',
    undefined
  )).items;
}
```
4. Lastly, you can use the data from the API:
```typescript
async function main() {
  const topTracks = await getTopTracks();
  console.log(topTracks);
}

main();
```

While this approach works, it has some drawbacks:

> - The fetchWebApi function lacks type safety, making it uncertain what data will return from the API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The `fetchWebApi` function lacks type safety, making it uncertain what data will return from the API.
```

> - You need to manually specify the parameters of the fetchWebApi function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You need to specify the parameters of the `fetchWebApi` function manually.
```

> - The fetchWebApi function allows calling any endpoint, even if it's not supported by the API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The `fetchWebApi` function allows calling any endpoint, even if it's not supported by the API.
```

Maybe mention the implications — ie that it's runtime error prone etc

> - The topTracks variable lacks type safety according to the API documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The `topTracks` variable lacks type safety according to the API documentation.
```

Maybe something simpler like: "We don't know the type of `topTracks`" or that it's `any`

## How I Use Web API with feTS?
To use the Spotify API with feTS, follow these steps:

1. Create a new TypeScript project and install feTS from [here](https://the-guild.dev/openapi/fets/client/quick-start).

2. Create a TypeScript file that exports your OpenAPI document as a constant:
```typescript filename="openapi.ts"
export default { openapi: '3.0.0' /* ... */ } as const;
```

> In our case, we will use the Spotify API, so we can retrieve the OpenAPI document from [here](https://developer.spotify.com/reference/web-api/open-api-schema.yaml). Since this OpenAPI document is in YAML format, we need to convert it to JSON format before using it in our project. You can find an example of how to perform the conversion [here](https://github.com/TuvalSimha/feTS-example/blob/main/convert-yaml-to-json.ts).

Reviewer: You can link this — https://api.apis.guru/v2/specs/spotify.com/sonallux/2023.2.27/openapi.json — it's already in the JSON format

> 3. Now, we are ready to use feTS decorators to create a type-safe API client:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Now, we are ready to use feTS to create a type-safe API client:
```

```typescript filename="spotify.ts"
import { createClient, Mutable } from "fets";
import spotifyOpenapi from "./spotifyOpenapi";

const client = createClient<Mutable<typeof spotifyOpenapi>>({
  endpoint: 'https://api.spotify.com/v1',
});
```

We import the `createClient` and `Mutable` functions from the feTS package and use the `createClient` function to instantiate a new client. Furthermore, we import the `spotifyOpenapi` file we created in the previous step and use it as a generic type for the `createClient` function.

> 

Reviewer: The fets API changed a bit. `Mutable` is deprecated — you probably need`NormalizeOAS`

4. Now, to retrieve our top 5 tracks from the last 30 days using the Spotify API, we can do the following:
```typescript filename="spotify.ts"

> const topTracks = await client["/me/top/{type}"].get({

Reviewer: It may also be worth mentioning that this code won't just work — there's a Spotify API token needed

  params: {
    type: "tracks",
  },
  query: {
    time_range: "short_term",
    limit: 5,
  },
});
```
By using the client in this manner, we gain type safety for the endpoint, parameters, and query.

![endpoint](/blog-assets/type-safe-your-api/endpoint.png)

> 5. In conclusion, we can use the topTracks variable with type safety:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. In conclusion, we know the type of the `topTracks` variable out-of-the-box.
```

```typescript filename="spotify.ts"
const topTracksResponse = await topTracks.json();
console.log(topTracksResponse);
```

## Advantages and Disadvantages of Using feTS for Spotify API Integration

### Advantages of feTS

> - Robust Type Safety: feTS eliminates the need for manual type definitions or code generation by inferring types from the OpenAPI specification. This ensures reliable and type-safe API interactions.

Reviewer 3: I would maybe even specifically name some clients that don't have type-safety as an examples (axios and maybe others from the announcement blog post), and also Swagger Codegen as an example of codegen one

> - Robust Type Safety: feTS eliminates the need for manual type definitions or code generation by inferring types from the OpenAPI specification and JSON Schema. This ensures reliable and type-safe API interactions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Robust Type Safety: feTS eliminates the need for manual type definitions or code generation by inferring types from the OpenAPI specification. This ensures reliable and type-safe API interactions.
```

> - OpenAPI Compatibility: By leveraging the OpenAPI specification, feTS seamlessly integrates with various tools and frameworks, providing flexibility and convenience.

Reviewer: It's a bit vague — not sure what it means, maybe an example?

- Developer-Friendly Experience: feTS simplifies the API consumption process, allowing developers to focus on writing clean and concise code.

> - No dependence on SDK maintainers: feTS allows you to use the API without waiting for the SDK maintainers to update the SDK.

Reviewer 3: I would even say that now companies can give up on creating SDKs and they better just offer openapi and direct their users to feTS

Reviewer 3: I would even mention that you had cases where the provider API has an SDK and you still chose to use feTS

> - Stop be depend on SDK maintainers: feTS allows you to use the API without the need to wait for the SDK maintainers to update the SDK.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- No dependence on SDK maintainers: feTS allows you to use the API without waiting for the SDK maintainers to update the SDK.
```

### Disadvantages of feTS
- Learning Curve: As with any new tool, there may be a slight learning curve involved in understanding feTS and its integration within your development workflow.

> - Limited Language Support: feTS built specifically for TypeScript, which may not be suitable for projects utilizing other programming languages.

Reviewer: I'd remove this whole section 😅

To begin, create a free trial Token for SportStats API access. The registration process is quick and
easy. You can find the registration form [here](https://sportsdata.io/cart/free-trial).

BTW, you can choose any other API you want, but for this example, we will use the SportStats API.
You can find openApi at `APIS.GURU` [website](https://apis.guru/about/)

### Step 2: Incorporate OpenAPI Definitions into TypeScript

Incorporate the OpenAPI definitions into a TypeScript file and export them using the `as const`
modifier. This process ensures strong typing and easy integration with `feTS`. A sample code snippet
is provided below:

```typescript filename="openapi.ts"
export default { openapi: '3.0.0' /* ... */ } as const
```

`openapi.ts` GitHub file
[here](https://github.com/TuvalSimha/feTS-example/blob/main/src/feTS/openapi.ts). You can choose any
OpenAPI file you want, but for this example, we will use the SportStats OpenAPI file. You can find
the OpenAPI file [here](https://sportsdata.io/developers/sports-data-open-api-swagger-files).

### Step 3: Install `feTS` and Create a Client

Now, we are ready to install `feTS` and create a new client. To do this, you can visit the docs

> [here](https://the-guild.dev/openapi/`feTS`/client/quick-start#installation).

Reviewer: Maybe let's add instructions here? You're covering some parts below anyway. Also, the link won't work with "`" inside

Next, create a new `TypeScript` file and import the `createClient` function from the `feTS` package.
Then, use the `createClient` function to instantiate a new client.

```typescript filename="client.ts"
import { createClient, type NormalizeOAS } from 'feTS'
import type openapi from './openapi'

export const client = createClient<NormalizeOAS<typeof openapi>>({
  endpoint: 'https://api.sportsdata.io/v4/soccer/stats'
})
```

`client.ts` GitHub file

> [here](https://github.com/TuvalSimha/feTS-example/blob/main/src/feTS/client.ts).

Reviewer: ?

> The following code demonstrates how to set up the client with a custom error handling plugin:

Reviewer: That comes a bit out of nowhere. What's the motivation behind adding the error-handling plugin? That could use some explanation and introduction

```typescript filename="client.ts"
/* eslint-disable react-hooks/rules-of-hooks */
import { ClientPlugin, createClient, type NormalizeOAS } from 'feTS'
import type openapi from './openapi'

function useErrorHandler(): ClientPlugin {
  return {
    onResponse({ response }) {
      if (!response.ok) {
        throw new Error(
          `Request failed with status ${response.status}, ${response.statusText}, ${response.url}`
        )
      }
    }
  }
}

export const client = createClient<NormalizeOAS<typeof openapi>>({
  plugins: [useErrorHandler()],
  endpoint: 'https://api.sportsdata.io/v4/soccer/stats'
})
```

By using the custom plugins, you can add your own logic to the client. You can find more information
about plugins [here](https://the-guild.dev/openapi/`feTS`/client/plugins).

### Step 4: Use the Client to Fetch Data from the API

Now, we are ready to use the client to fetch data from the API. In this step, we'll leverage the

> power of the `feTS` client we created earlier to fetch data from the SportStats API. The

Reviewer: The first two sentances are more or less the same

`fetchAllClubs` function will demonstrate how `feTS` simplifies the process of making API requests
and handling responses.

```typescript filename="endpoint.ts"
export async function fetchAllClubs() {
  const response = await client['/{format}/Teams/{competition}'].get({
    params: {
      competition: 'EPL',
      format: 'json'
    },
    headers: {
      'Ocp-Apim-Subscription-Key': YOUR_TOKEN_HERE
    },
    query: {
      key: YOUR_TOKEN_HERE
    }
  })

  const data = await response.json()

  return data
}
```

In this code snippet, we import the client object that we created using `feTS`. The `fetchAllClubs`

> function demonstrates how to use the `feTS` client to make a `GET` request to the

Reviewer: Repeated sentences. You have the same ones above

`/Teams/{competition}` endpoint of the SportStats API. We provide the required parameters, such as
the `competition` and `format`, and include necessary headers for authentication. All of those
parameters are auto completed by the IDE.

> Endpoint auto complete: ![Endpoint auto complete](/blog-assets/type-safe-your-api/endpoint.png)

Reviewer: Unnecessary 
```suggestion
![Endpoint auto complete](/blog-assets/type-safe-your-api/endpoint.png)
```

![Headers auto complete](/blog-assets/type-safe-your-api/autocomplate.png)

`endpoint.ts` GitHub file

> [here](https://github.com/TuvalSimha/feTS-example/blob/main/src/feTS/endpoint.ts).

Reviewer: What's the motivation behind these (I saw it also above)?

  }

  if (error) {
    return <div>Error: {error.message}</div>
  }

  return (
    <div>
      {data?.map(club => (
        <div key={club.TeamId}>{club.Name}</div>
      ))}
    </div>
  )
}

export default App
```

For more advanced and design example, you can check out the
[example](https://github.com/TuvalSimha/feTS-example/blob/main/src/App.tsx) in the GitHub
repository.

Lets create a design example for our soccer teams data:

```typescript filename="App.tsx"
import { useState } from 'react'
import { useQuery } from 'react-query'
import { TeamsCards } from './components/teams-crads'
import { fetchAllClubs } from './feTS/endpoint'
import { Club } from './feTS/type-helpers'

export function App() {
  const [selectedClub, setSelectedClub] = useState<Club | undefined>(undefined)

  const { data, isLoading, error } = useQuery('clubs', fetchAllClubs)

  if (isLoading) {
    return <div>Loading...</div>
  }

  if (error) {
    return <div>Error: {error.message}</div>
  }

  return (
    <div>
      <TeamsCards clubData={data} setSelectedClub={setSelectedClub} />
    </div>
  )
}
```

In this code snippet, i created a custom component called `TeamsCards` (GitHub file

> link)\[https://github.com/TuvalSimha/feTS-example/blob/main/src/components/teams-crads.tsx] that

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
link)[https://github.com/TuvalSimha/feTS-example/blob/main/src/components/teams-crads.tsx] that
```

display the selected club's information in a separate component.

In your code snippet, you've leveraged the power of `feTS` to define the Club type, which represents
a structured and strongly-typed representation of the data schema for a soccer club. This type is
essential for maintaining type safety and ensuring that the data exchanged between your application
and the API is well-defined and consistent.

The `Club` type is inferred using `feTS` `OASModel` type.This type inference mechanism allows you to
generate TypeScript types directly from the OpenAPI schema defined in your `openapi` file. Here's
how you've done it:

```typescript filename="type-helpers.ts"
import { NormalizeOAS, OASModel } from 'feTS'
import openapi from './openapi'

export type Club = OASModel<NormalizeOAS<typeof openapi>, 'Team'>
```

GitHub file [here](https://github.com/TuvalSimha/feTS-example/blob/main/src/feTS/type-helpers.ts).

![Club type](/blog-assets/type-safe-your-api/type.png)

And its done! You've successfully created a React application that fetches data from the SportStats
API using `feTS`.

![Result](/blog-assets/type-safe-your-api/result.gif)

> 

Reviewer 4: Maybe also link to the GitHub repository and full runnable example here?

  time and reducing runtime errors.
- Improved Efficiency: With auto-generated API clients and TypeScript types, `feTS` eliminates
  manual response parsing and improves overall development efficiency.
- Unified Interface: `feTS`'s unified and structured endpoint interface simplifies API navigation
  and promotes collaboration among developers.
- Seamless Development: The `feTS` workflow seamlessly integrates with development processes, from
  API interactions to UI rendering.

## Embracing a Future of Seamless REST API Development

As you integrate `feTS` into your projects, consider exploring its full potential. Experiment with
custom plugins, delve into advanced use cases, and stay engaged with the `feTS` community to
contribute to its evolution.

In closing, `feTS` represents a beacon of innovation in the dynamic world of software development.
By adopting `feTS`, you're not only enhancing your REST API development process; you're embracing a
culture of continuous improvement and excellence. Whether you're building a personal project or a
large-scale application, `feTS` equips you with the tools to create exceptional, type-safe, and
efficient software.

> Thank you for joining us on this journey through `feTS`. Here's to a future filled with seamless and

Reviewer 4: I would also add a link here to the fets documentation
